So in the last lecture we registered a custom post type.
But then when we created a new portfolio item and we tried to view it, we got a 404 page.
And the reason is we are using pretty permalink.
So if you take a look at the URL here you'll find it's "_themename_portfolio/" the name of the item that
we created.
So let's go to Settings and Permalinks. And I think we mentioned this before but in WordPress you can use
a plain permalink which will have the query args like so. Or you can have a pretty permalink which will
have a certain format like one of these. But the server actually needs the plain permalink in order to
process your request, in order to display your page.
So if you use pretty permalinks WordPress creates some configuration in your server that will map
these pretty permalinks to the actual plain permalink.
So when you are using pretty permalinks, somehow they are converted to plain permalinks eventually.
So let's go to post categories to illustrate more. And let's try to view a category.
And as you can see the URL is "category/" category name.
So that's what you'll see here.
But on the server this will be seen as a normal query arg that is called "category_name="
the name of the category.
And this will lead to the same page.
And actually URL will be converted back to the pretty URL. So WordPress stores this configuration
or this URL mapping thing in the database in a table called wp_options. So let's browse this table.
And here you'll find rewrite rules. So let's copy this key and to get something from wp_options table we
can call a function called get_option().
So I'm here having the header.php and I'm gonna open PRE tags and then PHP
tags and then "var_dump (get option())"
And then "rewrite_rules" to and let's remove the $default.
And let's take a look now at our website. As you can see we have here some rewrite rules and it's an array
of keys and values.
So for example we were taking a look at the category archive.
So somewhere here you will find "categories/" something and this will get mapped to "category_name="
something, right?
So you don't have to understand all of this. But you can just get an idea of what rewrite rules are and
if you do now Cmd+F and search for "portfolio", we won't find here anything that will map the portfolio
URLs.
Right?
And that's why this URL is not working.
So if you go now back to the permalink settings and resave this permalinks WordPress will update
the rewrite rules. And let's refresh now.
And as you can see we have new rules for "_themename_portfolio".
So if we go now to the portfolio item and refresh, we will now have our portfolio item. And currently it uses
the single.php but we can create a separate single page for it. We'll see how later.
So that was a brief idea on how pretty permalinks work on WordPress.
Let's remove this now and what we need to do now is we need whenever you activate the custom fields plugin
oh sorry, the custom post types plugin, we need to automatically refresh these rewrite rules, right? Without
actually having to go to the permalinks and saving the permalink settings.
So WordPress actually provides a function called flush_rewrite_rules(). And the function will update the rewrite
rules without having to save them here.
But when can we run this function?
Let's go to the index of the plugin. And plugins have a nice feature where you can run some code
once the plugin is activated. And to do that we can call a function called register_activation_hook().
And it takes the entry file of the plugin, the index.php. So we can get that using the PHP magic constant
__FILE__.
And it takes a function. And this function will run once the plugin is activated.
So let's call it "_themename__pluginname_activate". And let's create
this function.
And here we can call flush_rewrite_rules(), right?
And in order to test this,
we need to somehow remove the rewrite rules that we already created for the portfolio items.
So let's save. And now the portfolio item link will work and we need to get it back to not working.
Right?
So if we can do is we can deactivate our plugin. So let's go to Plugins and deactivate the post type plugin.
And let's go to the permalink settings and let's save  and now WordPress will update rewrite rules and now we don't have
the portfolio post type.
So the rewrite rules will not have the portfolio post types anymore.
Right?
Let's save a couple of times. And let's refresh this page and "Nothing found", right? Now let's activate the
plugin.
And now when we activate the plugin this function should run and flush_rewrite_rules() should run and we
should have our link working, right?
But the thing is we register or post type in the "init" action, right?
And when we activate our plugin here the "init" action has already fired.
So when we click activate now the "init" action won't rerun again. "init" action will run only
if we refresh the page.
So basically what we're gonna do is we're gonna activate the plugin. But we actually don't have
any post types registered because we actually registered them on the "init" action.
And here the "init" action has already fired.
So click on Activate and this function will run.
flush_rewrite_rules() will run but the URLs won't get updated because we don't have post types yet.
So to tackle this we can also run the function that registers the post type in the activation function, ok?
So now when you call flush_rewrite_rules() the post type will already be registered.
So let's save this and let's refresh. And let's activate the plugin.
And now let's refresh this.
And it's working without saving the permalinks or doing anything.
So this step is important. And I hope you understood why we have to do this and if not let me know if
you have any questions.
So the final thing we need to do, we need to do the same thing when we deactivate the plugin. We need to
unregister the post type and then flush_rewrite_rules() to remove the portfolio rules in the rewrite
rules.
Right?
So let's copy this actually.
And we have another one called "deactivation". And let's create a function called "deactivate".
Inside of it we can call a function called unregister_post_type() and it's called "_themename_portfolio".
And then call flush_rewrite_rules().
So this way when we remove the plugin, deactivate it, the rewrite will no longer be saved in WordPress.
We still have one final thing for this lecture.
If you go to Portfolio now and one of the taxonomies we'll have the same problem. If we try to
view one of these taxonomies  the URL will not be found.
Right?
So what we need to do is we need to simply also call the functions to register the taxonomies on plugin
activation. So let's copy the function names.
And on the activation we probably have also a function called unregister_taxonomy(),
yes, and our taxonomy names,
these ones.
And the skills.
So let's save now and let's
deactivate and then activate the plugin again to run these functions again. And let's go now
to the project type. And refresh and we have it here.
Let's also do one final thing before ending this lecture.
As you can see in the URL we have "_themename" and "project_type" and probably your theme users will not like your theme name
appear in the URL,
right?
And this also happens in the post type and in the taxonomy.
So what we can do is when we register the post types and taxonomies we can add a new argument here
called
"rewrite".
And it takes an array and you can add a custom "slug" here.
So let's call it "portfolio" and let's do the same for, let's copy this and do the same for the taxonomies. Let's call this
one "project_type".
And let's call this one.
Or actually we're gonna paste it this one it already had the rewrite rule. So great, let's save now.
And what we have to do now is we need to refresh our rewrite rules in order for these changes to reflect.
So we can either deactivate and activate the theme or we can just refresh the permalinks page and save.
And now if we go back to one of these, it's now "portfolio". And also here it's "not found", let's remove
the themename and we have it.
So what we're gonna do later in this section we're gonna make this an option in the Customizer.
We're gonna let the user choose his own slug that will appear in the URL.
So I think that's it for this lecture.
Let's in the next lecture create archives
and the single page for the portfolio items. So see you in the next lecture.